


Chapter 1



Introduction



1 – 1. Purpose



This pamphlet serves primarily as a professional development guide for all officers. It does not prescribe the path of as-signments or educational requirements that will guarantee success, but rather describes the full spectrum of developmental opportunities an officer can expect for a successful career. This document also serves as a mentoring tool for leaders at all levels and is an important personnel management guide for assignment officers, proponent, and Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA) election board members. Its focus is the development and career management of all officers of the U.S. Army.



1 – 2. References and forms



See appendix A.



1 – 3. Explanation of abbreviations and terms



See glossary.



1 – 4. Current perspective



Officer development for the Army should effectively balance breadth and depth of experience. Army operations are inherently joint. Officers must understand the terms of DODI 1300.19 and the Joint Qualification System. Officers should focus on developmental positions that enhance career progression and lead to joint qualified officer status. All assignments are important to sustain a trained and ready Army. An officer’s focus should be on bringing the warrior ethos to every job and every facet of their development. Officers use challenging assignments at all levels to help them hone, through expe-rience, what they have learned through their formal education about leading and training Soldiers. Operational factors— the constraints of time, Army requirements, positions available, and readiness—all influence the amount of time an officer will need to acquire appropriate leadership skills. Success will depend not on the number or type of positions held, but rather on the quality of duty performance in every assignment. It is tied to individual contribution, and related to the individual officer’s definition of success in the Army profession. Not all officers will be afforded opportunities to perform all types of duty. The types and extent of duties and assignments are articulated in the following chapters. For this publi-cation, the term "officers" encompasses warrant officers (warrant officers are appointed by commission at the grade of chief warrant officer two (CW2)), company grade officers, and field grade officers. All officers are direct representatives of the President of the United States. Chapters relating to officer education, general promotion policies, and officer evalu-ation apply to all special branches as well. The governing regulations for this pamphlet are AR 600 – 3 and AR 350 – 1.



Officers are encouraged to read both DA Pam 600 – 3 and Smartbook DA Pam 600 – 3, regardless of branch, functional area (FA), military occupational specialty (MOS), or career field held, because unique and valuable lessons in Army culture and officer professional development are found in every section. The Smartbook DA Pam 600 – 3 is available at https://www.milsuite.mil/book/groups/smartbook-da-pam-600 – 3.



This pamphlet documents officer personnel management and incorporates the evolving philosophies of the Army leadership. The Officer Personnel Management System (OPMS) enhances the warfighting capability of the Army, provides all officers with the information they need to ensure a reasonable opportunity for career success, and describes a framework that fulfills Army requirements with an officer corps balanced with the right grades and skills. Successive personnel man-agement studies have shown the need for a development and career management system that provides for the career de-velopment of the warrant officer segment of the Army’s officer corps. Better integration of warrant officers into the officer corps enhances the effectiveness and professionalism of warrant officers through improvements in training, development, assignment, promotion, and retention practices.



1 – 5. Warrior ethos and Army Values



Everything begins with the warrior ethos. The warrior ethos compels Soldiers to fight through all conditions to victory no matter how much effort is required. It is the Soldiers’ selfless commitment to the nation, mission, unit, and fellow Soldiers. It is the professional attitude that inspires every American Soldier. Warrior ethos is grounded in refusal to accept failure. It is developed and sustained through discipline, commitment to Army Values, and pride in the Army’s heritage. Warrior ethos is the foundation for our total commitment to victory in peace and war. It is the conviction that military service is much more than just another job. It defines who officers are and what officers do. It is linked to this country’s longstanding Army Values and the determination to do what is right and do it with pride. Soldiers enter the Army with their own values,





developed in childhood and nurtured through experience. We are all shaped by what we have seen, what we have learned, and whom we have met. However, once Soldiers put on the uniform and take the oath, they have opted to accept a warrior ethos and have promised to live by Army Values. Army Values form the very identity of the Army. They are nonnegotiable and apply to everyone at all times, in all situations. The trust that Soldiers have for one another and the trust the American people put in us demands that we live up to these values. These values are interdependent; that is, they support one another. You cannot follow one value and ignore another. The seven values that guide all leaders and the rest of the Army are loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity, and personal courage. Leaders must believe in them, model them in personal actions, and teach others to accept them. Officers require a demonstrated mastery of branch, FA, or MOS-specific skills, and grounding in these seven values to successfully lead Soldiers in to the future. Officer leaders who adopt a warrior ethos and a joint, expeditionary mindset will be confident that they are organized, trained, and equipped to operate anywhere in the world, at any time, in any environment, against any adversary to accomplish the assigned mission.



1 – 6. The Army profession



The Army profession assessed. In 2010, senior Army leadership directed the Commander, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) to conduct a comprehensive review of the Army profession. This Armywide assessment began in January 2011. The purpose was to assess how the Army has changed after more than 10 years of continuous deployments and how it must adapt to remain successful in an era of persistent conflict.



The Army profession defined. The Army is an American profession of arms, a vocation composed of experts certified in the ethical application of land combat power, serving under civilian authority, entrusted to defend the Constitution and the rights and interests of the American people.

The Army professional defined. An American professional Soldier is an expert, a volunteer certified in the profession of arms, bonded with comrades in a shared identity and culture of sacrifice and service to the nation and the Constitution, who adheres to the highest ethical standards and is a steward of the future of the Army profession.



1 – 7. Mentoring, counseling, and coaching



Today’s leaders have the critical responsibility to develop future leaders who are prepared to meet tomorrow’s chal-lenges. An essential component of this development is mentoring. The term mentorship refers to the voluntary, develop-mental relationship between a person of greater experience and a person of lesser experience that is characterized by mutual trust and respect (see ADP 6 – 22 for additional information on mentorship).

Mentorship impacts both personal development (maturity, interpersonal, and communication skills) as well as pro-fessional development (technical and tactical knowledge and career-path knowledge).



The goal of mentorship is to assist the lesser-experienced person in reaching their personal and professional potential. It is critical to understand that mentorship is not any one behavior or set of behaviors, but rather includes all of the leader development behaviors (for example, counseling, teaching, coaching, and role modeling) that are displayed by a trusted advisor.



The strength of the mentorship relationship is based on mutual trust and respect. Assessment, feedback, and guidance accelerate the developmental process and enhance performance. When this occurs within a mentoring relationship, even higher performance results.

Mentoring requires taking advantage of any opportunity to teach, counsel, or coach to build skills and confidence in the mentored. Mentoring is not limited to formal, structured sessions, but can include every event from quarterly training briefs, to after action reviews, to unstructured, casual, recreational activities. To aid in the mentorship (and career manage-ment) process, the Army has developed and implemented the Army Career Tracker (available at https://actnow.army.mil), an Army leadership development tool that uses the professional development model (PDM) and provides a common picture of training and experience. Used properly, this tool facilitates structured mentorship and can be utilized and revised by successive mentors as an officer progresses in experience. Additionally, the Army Mentorship Program (available at https://myarmybenefits.us.army.mil) is an official effort to provide additional resources for leaders and junior officers.



One of the most important legacies that today’s senior leaders can leave with the Army is to mentor junior leaders to fight and win future conflicts. Mentoring develops great leaders to lead great Soldiers.



1 – 8. Officer Personnel Management System overview



Historical perspective. The OPMS was instituted in 1972, as a result of the U.S. Army War College Study on Mili-tary Professionalism and a follow-on analysis directed by the Deputy Chief of Staff (DCS), G – 1. Numerous changes in personnel management policy were incorporated into OPMS between its implementation in 1975 and 1981. After passage of the Defense Officer Personnel Management Act (DOPMA) by Congress in 1981, the Chief of Staff, Army (CSA), ordered a major review to examine the impact of the legislation on OPMS policies. As a result, OPMS II was developed





2	DA PAM 600–3 • 3 April 2019



Chapter 2



Officer Leader Development



2 – 1. Leader development overview



The Army Leader Development Strategy defines leader development as the deliberate, continuous, and progressive process, founded in Army Values, that grows Soldiers and Army Civilians into competent, committed, professional leaders of character. Leader development is achieved through the career-long synthesis of the training, education, and experiences acquired through opportunities in the institutional, operational, and self-development domains, supported by peer and de-velopmental relationships. Army leaders must be able to understand the conditions of the modern global environment, analyze them in terms of the problems they face and reframe them in mission command terms. our leaders must be able to apply problem solving and decision-making skills to defeat an enemy who presents asymmetric threats, who is a fleeting target and embedded in the populace, who is adaptive and unpredictable, who has the capability to shift between irregular and conventional warfare, and who is a near peer enemy capable of conventional offense and defense operations as well. Our officers must have the leadership capabilities to fight among the populace and deny support to our adversaries while encouraging support to the local government. Leaders must recognize changing operational environments and remain fully prepared to reconfigure resources to undertake a range of altered missions.

The leader and functional competencies we develop through training and experience must provide us with the capa-bility to successfully interact at the human level with not only our own Soldiers, but with unified action partners; the indigenous populace and government; and with local, national, and international media. To develop this complex and comprehensive set of leader capabilities requires a strategy that employs military and civilian education, leverages expe-rience gained during assignments in operational or generating force units (as well as during broadening assignments), and utilizes self-development activities that are broad ranging. This strategy must produce a steady flow of talented, agile leaders who are proficient in core leader and functional competencies across the operational themes and comfortable with risk. Leader competencies for decisive action will expand to encompass cross-cultural communications, language, and the ability to enable economic development, governance, and conflict resolution through negotiation.



2 – 2. Leader development strategy



Pursuit of the Army Leader Development Strategy employs the three domains of leader development—institutional, oper-ational, and self-development. These domains define and engage a continuous cycle of education, training, selection, ex-perience, assessment, feedback, reinforcement, and evaluation. Learning, experience, and feedback provide the basis for professional growth. Overall, leader development enhances leader capabilities for positions of increasing responsibility. The goal of Army leader development is to create the training, education, and experience conditions that produce agile, innovative, and adaptive leaders of unimpeachable integrity, character, and competence who act to achieve decisive results and who understand and are able to exploit the full potential of current and future Army doctrine.



2 – 3. Domains of leader development



Institutional. The institutional Army (schools and training centers) is the foundation for lifelong learning. Training is an organized, structured, continuous, and progressive process based on sound principles of learning designed to increase the capability of individuals, units, and organizations to perform specified tasks or skills. The objective of training is to increase the ability of leaders to competently perform in training and operational situations. Individual task training builds individual competence and confidence to perform these tasks in support of collective training and operations. Education is the process of imparting knowledge and developing the competencies and attributes Army professionals need to accom-plish any mission the future may present. Education contributes to the development of Soldier and Army Civilian leader competencies, focusing on fundamentals which are later practiced, expanded, and improved in training and experience. Education occurs in the institutional, operational, and self-development domains. As a component of leader development, education contributes to the growth of the three leader attributes of character, presence, and intellect. Education focuses on intellect and moral character of leaders to improve judgment and reasoning and hone the habits of the mind: agility, adaptability, empathy, intellectual curiosity, and creativity. Education in the Army is primarily professional military edu-cation (PME) or Civilian Education System, but may include studies within civilian academia. PME and Civilian Education System are progressive and sequential across a career continuum to ensure that Soldiers and Army Civilians are successful at each stage of their professional service, while continually growing in the competencies and attributes needed for higher levels of service.

Operational. Operational and broadening assignments constitute the second domain of leader development. Upon completion of institutional training, leaders are ideally assigned to operational positions. This operational experience pro-vides them the opportunity to use, hone, and build on what they learned through the formal education process. Experience





gained through on-the-job training in a variety of challenging assignments and additional duties prepares officers to lead and train Soldiers, both in garrison and ultimately in combat. The commander or leader in the unit plays a significant and instrumental role in this area. Commanders and other senior leaders are particularly responsible for mentoring that is vital to the development of junior officers. They introduce the officer to their unit and establish leader development programs. They explain both unit and individual performance standards, and provide periodic assessments and continual feedback to develop the officer. Beyond accomplishing the mission on a daily basis, developing subordinate leaders is a professional responsibility which must be carried out to guarantee the quality of our future leaders. Similarly, periodic assignment to broadening positions throughout the career timeline provides officers with exposure to a different environment, presents them with opportunities to work complex problems, and ultimately helps the Army grow strategic, adaptive, and innovative executive-level leaders capable of performing above and beyond the tactical and operational levels. In order to maximize an officer’s ability to pursue broadening assignments and be competitive for promotion to senior commissioned ranks, it is imperative for officers and commanders to understand and adhere to existing guidance that limits key developmental (KD) assignments.



Self-development. Learning is a lifelong process. Institutional training and operational assignments alone do not ensure that Army officers attain and sustain the degree of competency needed to perform their varied missions. The pro-fession of arms requires comprehensive self-study and training. Leaders must commit to a lifetime of professional and personal growth to stay at the cutting edge of their profession. They must keep pace with changing operational require-ments, new technologies, common weapons platforms, and evolving doctrines. Every officer is responsible for his or her own self-development. Self-assessment and taking appropriate remedial or reinforcing action is critical to a leader’s suc-cess. Self-development programs include activities that stretch the individual beyond the demands of on-the-job or insti-tutional training. Self-development, consisting of individual study, research, professional reading, practice, and self-as-sessment, is accomplished via numerous means (studying, observing, and experiencing), and is consistent with an officer’s personal self-development action plan and professional goals. Self-development is the key aspect of individual officer qualification that solidifies the Army leader development process. A critical component of the self-development domain is multi-source assessment and feedback (MSAF). Although officers may take ample steps to facilitate self-development, the MSAF program—also referred to as “360 degree assessment”—helps officers raise self-awareness and better shape their self-development efforts. The MSAF provides input from peers, superiors, and subordinates which help the rated officer develop as a self-aware and adaptable leader. Officers can access the “360 degree assessment” at https://msaf.army.mil. Results of the feedback remain confidential, are only available to the rated officer, and are used for self-development rather than evaluative purposes.



2 – 4. Leader principles



Six principles are inherent in officer development and career management. These principles serve as a frame of reference for the individual officer, commander, mentor, and branch and FA proponent.



Leader development is based on ADP 1, providing the foundation for our warfighting doctrine. It articulates the constitutional and legal basis for our being, the national security objectives, the spectrum of warfare, and our beliefs con-cerning the profession of arms to include the professional Army ethic and values. ADP 3 – 0 is our keystone warfighting doctrine for subordinate and tactical-level doctrine, professional education, and individual and unit training. ADP 7 – 0 tells us how we should train, including the senior leader’s role. ADP 6 – 22 outlines the core dimensions of leadership and the basis for leadership excellence. Together, these references provide the foundation needed to develop competent, confident leaders capable of assuming positions of greater responsibility and creating the conditions for sustained organizational success.



Leader development programs should be responsive to the environment, including such factors as law, policy, re-sources, force structure, world situation, technology, and professional development.

An officer’s success should be measured in terms of contribution. An officer’s professional goals are directly related to his or her own definition of success in the profession of arms.



High-quality Soldiers deserve high-quality leaders. This principle is the heart of leader development and breathes life into all aspects of the seven Army fundamental imperatives—training, force mix, doctrine, modern equipment, quality people, leader development, and facilities.

We recognize as a philosophy that leaders can be developed. While a principle in itself, it is inextricably linked to the philosophy of shared responsibilities among the individual leaders; the schoolhouses, branches, and FA proponents throughout the Army; and the commanders in the field.

Leader development is cooperative and holistic. The individual officer, unit commanders, mentors, and Army educa-tional institutions all share in the responsibility for developing leaders at every level.







6	DA PAM 600–3 • 3 April 2019



2 – 5. Leader development and the Officer Education System



Company and field grade officers. The Officer Education System provides the formal military educational founda-tion to company and field grade officers necessary to prepare them for increased responsibilities and successful perfor-mance at the next higher level. Its goal is to produce a broad-based corps of leaders who possess the necessary values, attributes, and skills to perform their duties in service to the nation. These leaders must know how the Army runs and demonstrate confidence, integrity, critical judgment, and responsibility while operating in an environment of complexity, ambiguity, and rapid change. To build effective teams capable of supporting joint and multinational operations in this environment, they must be adaptable, creative, and bold amid continuous organizational and technological change. The Officer Education System is discussed in more detail in chapter 4. The following paragraphs highlight key aspects of officer development—

Common core. Common core is the combination of common military tasks, common leader, and directed or man-dated tasks for specific courses, grade levels, or organizational levels regardless of branch or career management field or program. These subjects comprise the tasks all officers are expected to perform successfully, regardless of branch. Com-mon core instruction begins at pre-commissioning and continues at each educational level. The instruction is progressive and sequential, building upon the skills and knowledge acquired through previous training and operational assignments.

Entry level officer training. To address shortcomings identified by the Army Training and Leader Development Panel (officer) study, the Army implemented the Basic Officer Leaders Course (BOLC). The objective of the BOLC is to develop technically competent and confident platoon leaders, regardless of branch, who are grounded in leadership, basic technical and tactical skill proficiency, are physically and mentally strong, and embody the warrior ethos. To achieve this objective, BOLC capitalizes on experience-based training, logically structured to build upon and reinforce previous les-sons. The BOLC occurs in two phases. BOLC A is pre-commissioning training conducted by the traditional pre-commis-sioning sources. It provides the foundation of common core skills, knowledge, and attitudes desired of all newly commis-sioned lieutenants. BOLC B is a combination of common block instruction targeting small-unit leaders skills focusing on warfighting and the warrior ethos, and branch specific technical and tactical training conducted at branch school locations. The BOLC Direct Commissioned Officer Course is designed to provide direct commission officers without BOLC A pre-commissioning training the necessary skills to succeed at BOLC B. Branch specific graduation requirements are estab-lished by branch proponents. Officers must be individually assessed and meet their respective branch occupational physical demands identified in DA Pam 611 – 21 to graduate BOLC.



Captains’ Officer Education System. The branch Captain Career Course (CCC) prepares company grade officers to command Soldiers at the company, troop, or battery level, and to serve as staff officers at battalion and brigade levels. RA and RC officers incur a 1-year active duty service obligation (ADSO) for attendance at a branch CCC upon completion or termination of the course. Officers attend CCC following selection for promotion to the grade of captain, normally before company-level command. Select captains who have demonstrated superior performance in their basic branches may be selected to receive this training at other than their branch schools (for example, a field artillery officer might attend the CCC for armor officers.) This cross training benefits officers of both branches. Officers seeking accession into civil affairs, psychological operations, and special forces (SF) will attend the Special Operations Center of Excellence CCC. The cap-tains’ PME centers on the technical, tactical, and leadership competencies needed for success in follow-on assignments. CCC is a prerequisite for promotion to major for RC officers.



Intermediate level education. The intermediate level education (ILE) is the Army’s formal education program for majors. It is a tailored resident education program designed to prepare new field grade officers for their next 10 years of service. It produces field grade officers with a warrior ethos and joint, expeditionary mindset, who are grounded in warf-ighting doctrine, and who have the technical, tactical, and leadership competencies to be successful at more senior levels in their respective branch or FA. ILE consists of a Common Core Course phase of operational instruction offered to all officers, and a tailored education phase (qualification course) tied to the technical requirements of the officer’s branch or FA. The RC also has a tailored distributed learning ILE program. ILE Common Core Course is a prerequisite for promotion to lieutenant colonel in the RC.



Senior Service College. The Senior Service College (SSC) provides senior level PME and leader development training. The Army’s SSC, the U.S. Army War College, prepares military, civilian, and international leaders to assume strategic leadership responsibilities in military or national security organizations. It educates students about employment of the U.S. Army as part of a unified, joint, or multinational force in support of the national military strategy, requires research into operational and strategic issues, and conducts outreach programs that benefit the nation.

Warrant officers.

Background. The goal of warrant officer training and education within the Officer Education System is to produce highly specialized expert officers, leaders, and trainers who are fully competent in technical, tactical, and leadership skills; creative problem solvers able to function in highly complex and dynamic environments; and proficient operators, main-tainers, administrators, and managers of the Army’s equipment, support activities, and technical systems. Warrant officer





leader development is a continuous lifelong learning process beginning with pre-appointment training and education. The Officer Education System prepares warrant officers to successfully perform in increasing levels of responsibility through-out an entire career. The Officer Education System provides the pre-appointment, branch MOS-specific, and leader devel-opment training needed to produce technically and tactically competent warrant officer leaders for assignment to platoon, detachment, company, battalion, and higher level organizations.



Common core. Common core is the combination of common military tasks, common leader, and directed or man-dated tasks for specific courses, grade levels, or organizational levels regardless of branch or career management field or program. It comprises the tasks all officers are expected to perform successfully regardless of branch. Common core in-struction begins at pre-appointment and continues at each educational level. The instruction is progressive and sequential and builds upon the skills and knowledge acquired through previous training and operational assignments.

Pre-appointment training. Pre-appointment training qualifies individuals to serve as officers. The purposes of pre-appointment training are to educate and train candidates, assess their readiness and potential for appointment to warrant officer, and prepare them for progressive and continuing development. All RA warrant officer candidates must attend the resident Warrant Officer Candidate School (WOCS) at Fort Rucker, AL. The ARNG and USAR warrant officer candidates may attend WOCS at either Fort Rucker or one of the RC regional training institute’s WOCS. The WOCS graduates are appointed to warrant officer one (WO1). The appointment is contingent upon certification by the MOS proponents that the warrant officer is technically and tactically qualified to serve in the authorized warrant officer MOS.

Warrant Officer Basic Course. The Warrant Officer Basic Courses (WOBCs) are branch specific qualification courses that ensure newly appointed warrant officers receive the MOS-specific training and technical certification needed to perform in the MOS at the platoon through brigade levels. Training is performance oriented and focuses on technical skills, leadership, effective communication, unit training, maintenance operations, security, property accountability, tac-tics, and development of subordinates. Newly appointed warrant officers who attend WOBC will incur a 6-year ADSO upon graduation. This ADSO does not apply to warrant officers who already hold a warrant officer MOS or reclassified to another MOS. Warrant officers who attend Army directed professional development courses, including Warrant Officer Advanced Course (WOAC), Warrant Officer Intermediate Level Education (WOILE), and Warrant Officer Senior Service Education (WOSSE), do not incur a service obligation. Branch specific graduation requirements are established by branch proponents. Warrant officers must be individually assessed and meet their respective branch occupational physical de-mands identified in DA Pam 611 – 21 to graduate BOLC and WOBC.



Warrant Officer Advanced Course. The WOAC prepares the officer to serve in senior positions at the CW3 level. The WOAC includes two phases: a nonresident common core module and a resident phase, which includes a common core module and MOS-specific module.



Warrant Officer Intermediate Level Education. The warrant officer ILE is a branch immaterial resident course which prepares for duty in chief warrant officer four (CW4) grade technician and staff officer positions at battalion and higher levels. Some branches have developed branch specific follow-on track courses to ensure intermediate level warrant officers receive the latest technical and functional PME within their career field. Warrant officers will not be awarded military education level (MEL) Q until all branch-required phases are complete.

Warrant Officer Senior Service Education. The WOSSE is currently the capstone course for warrant officer PME. It is a branch immaterial resident course which provides master-level professional warrant officers with a broader Army level perspective required for assignment to CW5 grade level positions as technical, functional, and branch systems inte-grators, trainers, and leaders at the highest organizational levels. Some branches have developed branch specific follow-on track courses to ensure intermediate level warrant officers receive the latest technical and functional PME within their career field. Warrant officers will not be awarded MEL L until all branch-required phases are complete.



Chapter 3



Officer Personnel Management System and Career Management



3 – 1. Purpose



The purpose of OPMS is to—

Acquire. Identify, recruit, select, and prepare individuals for service as officers in our Army.

Develop. Maximize officer performance and potential through training and education in accordance with AR 350 – 1, as well as through assignment, self-development, and certification of officers to build agile and adaptive leaders.



Utilize. Assign officers with the appropriate skills, experience, and competencies to meet Army requirements and promote continued professional development.



Sustain. Retain officers with the appropriate skills, experience, competencies, and manner of performance to meet Army requirements and promote continued professional development.





8	DA PAM 600–3 • 3 April 2019



retain the right number of officers, with the proper skills, to meet the Army’s needs. The objective of promotion within the special branches is to maintain an orderly promotion flow that replaces losses, meets changing requirements, and recog-nizes uneven attrition rates within these competitive categories. Provisions of the system include mandated floors by branch, FA, or AOC and the optional employment of selection ceilings. Selection opportunity may vary among competitive categories based upon projected requirements in the higher grades.



Instructions to promotion boards. Each board receives a memorandum of instruction from the Secretary of the Army providing guidance for the selection process. Copies of these memorandums are released to the officer corps following approval and public release of the board results. That portion pertaining to specialization has been expanded significantly to indicate that, in today’s Army, the specialist has a significant role and responsibility. The instructions highlight the need for the different officer professional development patterns required for accomplishing the Army’s total mission. Instead of a single traditionally accepted career pattern through various grades, multiple paths for advancement exist as the Army recognizes divergent Service needs and individual capabilities. Further, instructions to promotion boards prescribe that promotion potential will be determined, for the most part, based on an officer’s record of performance in their designated branch or FA and the officer’s overall performance.

Promotion board membership. Personal qualifications, experience, and performance determine promotion board membership. The ACOM, ASCC, and DRU commanders recommend board members (colonel and below) from lists pro-vided by the HQDA Secretariat for Selection Boards of eligible candidates who meet qualifications in a broad spectrum of military fields. Following policy guidance from the Secretary of the Army, membership is designed to adequately reflect the skills, commands, and diversity of the competitive category under consideration. The Director of Military Personnel Management, DCS, G – 1, approves the final slate of members on behalf of the Secretary of the Army. The CSA, approves general officer membership.



Special selection boards. SSBs are convened, as required, to consider officers with dates of rank above or in the promotion zone that were erroneously omitted from consideration or whose official records contained material errors seen by the original board. Erroneous entries or omissions on DA Form 4037 generally do not justify reconsideration by a SSB. Officers are responsible for reviewing their DA Form 4037 at least annually and AR 600 – 8 – 29 allows them to submit a letter to the president of the board when they are in the zone of consideration. This is considered sufficient opportunity to overcome minor administrative deficiencies.



Chapter 6



Officer Evaluation System



6 – 1. Overview



The Officer Evaluation System identifies those officers most qualified for advancement and assignment to positions of increased responsibility. Under this system, officers are evaluated on their performance and potential through duty evaluations, school evaluations, and HQDA evaluations (both central selection boards and HRC officer management as-sessments).



The assessment of an officer’s potential is a subjective judgment of the officer’s capability to perform at a specified level of responsibility, authority, or sensitivity. Potential is normally associated with the capability to perform at a higher grade. However, the Army also assesses the officer’s potential for retention and increased responsibility within a specified grade.

Officer qualifications provide the real link between the needs of the Army and individual officer performance. They focus on an officer’s background in terms of experience and expertise and include such items as specialty qualification, successful performance in demanding positions, civil and military schooling, and physical profile. Performance is the execution of tasks in support of the organization or Army missions. While results or accomplishment of a series of tasks is the primary focus, the manner in which tasks are approached and a general adherence to officer corps professional values are also important. The performance assessment by HQDA differs significantly from that accomplished in the organiza-tional duty environment. The organizational duty assessment involves personal knowledge of the situations surrounding a specific performance for a specified period of time. The HQDA assessment is accomplished by an after-the-fact assessment of a series of reports on performance over a variety of duty positions and covering the officer’s entire career.



6 – 2. Officer evaluation reporting



The officer evaluation reporting is a subsystem of the Officer Evaluation System. It includes the methods and pro-cedures for organizational evaluation and assessment of an officer’s performance and an estimation of potential for future service based on the manner of that performance.



The official documents of these assessments are the DA Form 67 – 10 series and DA Form 1059.



30	DA PAM 600–3 • 3 April 2019



The performance evaluation contained on the OER is for a specific rating period only. It focuses on comparing the officer’s performance with the duty position requirements and the standards of the rating officials. Performance includes the methods or means of effort used by an officer in accomplishing tasks assigned by superiors or implied by the duty position. Performance assessments are then determined as a result of the rated officers efforts, degree of task accomplish-ment, and the degree of compliance with competencies and attributes encompassed within the leadership requirements model that apply to all officers, regardless of duty position, grade, or specialty.



The potential evaluation contained on the OER is a projection of the performance accomplished during the rating period into future circumstances that encompass greater responsibilities. The primary focus of this assessment is the capa-bility of the officer to meet increasing levels of responsibility in relation to his or her peers.

DA Form 1059 is prepared for officers who take part in resident and nonresident training at Service schools and civilian educational institutions. It explains the accomplishments, potential, and limitations of students while attending courses. Furthermore, performance assessments are linked to the leadership requirements model in accordance with ADP 6 – 22 and ADRP 6 – 22.



6 – 3. Relationship with the Officer Personnel Management System, leader development, and character development process



The primary function of the EES is to provide information from the organizational chain of command to be used by HQDA for officer personnel decisions. The information contained in the OER is correlated with the Army’s needs and individual officer qualifications. It provides the basis for OPMS personnel actions such as promotion, branch and FA designation, elimination, retention in grade, retention on active duty, reduction in force, command and project manager designation, school selection, assignment, and specialty designation.



An equally important function of the EES is to encourage the professional development of the officer corps. To accomplish this, the system uses the Army’s leadership doctrine to relate teaching, coaching, counseling, and assessing core leader competencies and attributes to improved performance and enhanced professional development. Particularly valuable is the developmental counseling fostered through senior officers linking the Army’s evaluation system to its leader development and personnel management systems. Developmental counseling is the responsibility of senior officers to provide feedback concerning professional growth, potential, and career pathways to success. While these aspects of developmental counseling through mentorship have always been a major element of the evaluation process, they must be continually emphasized.



For further information on the Officer Evaluation System, see AR 623 – 3 and DA Pam 623 – 3.



Chapter 7



Reserve Component Officer Development and Career Management



7 – 1. Purpose



The RCs of the Army include the ARNG and the USAR. This chapter discusses the unique aspects of OPMS for the RC. The OPMS for the RC is executed by HRC for lieutenant colonels and below (AGR, individual mobilization aug-mentee (IMA), and Individual Ready Reserve (IRR)) for the USAR. The Office of the Chief, Army Reserve manages the Ready Reserve colonels, sergeants major, and command sergeants major for the USAR. The state adjutants general (AGs) and the National Guard Bureau (NGB) manage the officer population for the ARNG.

When not in a federalized status (under Federal control), the ARNG comes under control of the states, the territories of Guam and the Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the District of Columbia. The overall management of ARNG officers is stipulated in NGR 600 – 100 and is stipulated in NGR 600 – 101 for Warrant Officers.



7 – 2. Reserve Component overview



The RC consists of three categories: the Ready Reserve, the Standby Reserve, and the Retired Reserve. All Reserve and Guard officers are assigned to one of these three categories. It is common for an RC officer to serve in various capac-ities in a variety of duty statuses during a career.

The Ready Reserve consists of the Selected Reserve, the IRR, and the Inactive National Guard (ING) and is regulated by NGR 614 – 1.

The Selected Reserve. The Selected Reserve consists of the following:

Units manned and equipped to serve or train either as operational or as augmentation units. This category consists of officers who are required to perform 48 unit training assemblies per year and 14 days (15 days for ARNG) per year in annual training status or officers in the training pipeline (for example, officers who have not yet completed initial active







